Conda Generic Plugin Hooks (#45)
conda-incubator/ceps: new-cep.md

<table>
  <tr><td> Title </td><td> Conda Generic Plugin Hooks</td>
  <tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
  <tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Full Name &lt;thathaway@anaconda.com&gt;</td></tr>
  <tr><td> Created </td><td> Dec 22, 2022</td></tr>
  <tr><td> Updated </td><td> Dec 22, 2022</td></tr>
  <tr><td> Discussion </td><td> _TBD_ </td></tr>
  <tr><td> Implementation </td><td> _TBD_ </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

> In order to support a variety use cases and extensions to conda's default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to support a variety of use cases and extensions to conda's default
```

behavior, we propose a set of generic plugin hooks in this CEP. Included will 
be `pre_run` and `post_run` hooks that will allow
plugin authors to execute their plugin code before or after conda commands
run, respectively. Additionally, we introduce the `on_exception` plugin 
hook that will allow plugin authors to execute custom code when an exception is thrown. 
For each hook, we outline example use cases and
show exactly how plugin authors will define these new hooks.

## Specification

> This specific calls for the creation of the following three new plugin hooks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This CEP specifically calls for the creation of the following three new plugin hooks:
```

- `name`: unique name which identifies this plugin hook
- `action`: a callable which contains the code to be run
- `run_for`: a `set` of strings representing the commands this will be run on (e.g. `install` or `create`)

#### Example

```python
from conda.plugins import hookimpl, CondaPreRun, CondaPostRun

PLUGIN_NAME = "custom_plugin"

def custom_plugin_pre_run_action():
    """
    Defines our custom pre-run action which simply prints a message.
    """
    print("pre-run action")

@hookimpl
def conda_pre_run():
    """
    Returns our CondaPreRun class which attaches our ``custom_plugin_pre_run_action``
    to the "install" and "create" command.
    """
    yield CondaPreRun(
        name=f"{PLUGIN_NAME}_pre_run",
        action=custom_plugin_pre_run_action,
        run_for={"install", "create"}
    )

def custom_plugin_post_run_action():
    """
    Defines our custom post-run action which simply prints a message.
    """
    print("post-run action")

@hookimpl
def conda_post_run():
    """
    Returns our CondaPreRun class which attaches our ``custom_plugin_post_run_action`` to
    the "install" and "create" command.
    """

>     yield CondaPreRun(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    yield CondaPostRun(
```

        name=f"{PLUGIN_NAME}_post_run",
        action=custom_plugin_post_run_action,
        run_for={"install", "create"}
    )
```

### `on_exception`

For the `on_exception` hook, plugin authors will begin by defining a `conda.plugins.hookimpl` decorated 
function called `conda_on_exception`. This function will return the `CondaOnException` class with the
following attributes:

- `name`: unique name which identifies this plugin hook
- `action`: a callable which contains the code to be run

#### Example

```python
from conda.plugins import hookimpl, CondaOnException

PLUGIN_NAME = "custom_plugin"

def custom_plugin_on_exception_action():
    """
    Defines our custom on_exception action which simply prints a message.
    """
    print("on_exception action")

@hookimpl
def conda_on_exception():
    """
    Returns our CondaOnException class which attaches our ``custom_plugin_on_exception_action``.
    """

>     yield CondaPreRun(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    yield CondaOnException(
```

### Better authentication handling

The `pre_run` hook will enable plugin authors to interrupt the normal start up of conda commands.
For better authentication handling, this opens the door for either asking the user directly
for their credentials or retrieving credentials from an OS keyring. These credentials can
then be stored and used for the duration of the running command.

A draft of this could function can be found in the following pull request:

- https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12139

### Better exception logging

The `on_exception` hook will enable plugin authors to use custom logging mechanisms for exceptions.
One use case could be hooking up conda to the popular Sentry error logging platform (see: https://sentry.io/welcome/).

### Plus more

The above use cases are just a few possibilities out there. We know that our users and community will
have many more ideas for how best to utilize these generic plugin hooks.

## Rationale

By introducing a set of generic hooks like the above, we grant plugin authors with quite a bit of
flexibility for customizing how conda behaves. We believe starting out with a small set of generic

> plugin hooks is the best so we do not overwhelm would be developers at first. Depending on how much
> these are used and whether there is a demand, we may choose add more in the future with a new CEP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plugin hooks is the best so that we do not overwhelm potential conda contributors. Depending on how
much these are used and whether there is a demand, we may choose to add more in the future with a new CEP.
```

## Specification

This specification calls for the creation of the following three new plugin hooks:

- `pre_command`: runs before the invoked conda command is run
- `post_command`: runs after the invoked conda command is run
- `on_exception`: runs when an exception is raised while a conda command is invoked

Below, we discuss an example showing the use of the `pre_command` and `post_command` hooks together
and an example of the `on_exception` hook.

### `pre_command` and `post_command`

Plugin authors create the `pre_command` and `post_command` hooks by first defining a `conda.plugins.hookimpl`
decorated function called either `conda_pre_command` or `conda_post_command` which return either a `CondaPreCommand` 
or `CondaPostCommand` class, respectively. These classes will both receive the following three properties:

- `name`: unique name which identifies this plugin hook
- `action`: a callable which contains the code to be run
- `run_for`: a Python `set` of strings representing the commands this will be run on (e.g. `install` and `create`)

#### Example

```python
from conda.plugins import hookimpl, CondaPreCommand, CondaPostCommand

PLUGIN_NAME = "custom_plugin"

> def custom_plugin_pre_command_action():
>     """
>     Defines our custom pre-run action which simply prints a message.
>     """
>     print("pre-run action")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
def custom_plugin_pre_command_action(command):
    """
    Defines our custom pre-run action which simply prints a message.
    """
    print(f"pre-run action before {command}")
```

Author: I'm curious why you added the `command` argument for this and the other example. It does raise an interesting question of what, if any arguments, we want to pass in. I'm assuming that plugin authors would simply access the `context` object for most runtime config settings they may need.

Author: Okay... I thought about it a little more. Makes sense 😄

> @hookimpl
> def conda_pre_command():
>     """
>     Returns our CondaPreCommand class which attaches our ``custom_plugin_pre_command_action``
>     to the "install" and "create" command.
>     """
>     yield CondaPreCommand(
>         name=f"{PLUGIN_NAME}_pre_command",
>         action=custom_plugin_pre_command_action,
>         run_for={"install", "create"}
>     )

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@hookimpl
def conda_pre_commands():
    """
    Yields our CondaPreCommand instance which attaches our ``custom_plugin_pre_command_action``
    to the "install" and "create" command.
    """
    yield CondaPreCommand(
        name=f"{PLUGIN_NAME}_pre_command",
        action=custom_plugin_pre_command_action,
        run_for={"install", "create"}
    )
```

> def custom_plugin_post_command_action():
>     """
>     Defines our custom post-run action which simply prints a message.
>     """
>     print("post-run action")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
def custom_plugin_post_command_action(command):
    """
    Defines our custom post-run action which simply prints a message.
    """
    print(f"post-run action after {command}")
```

@hookimpl
def conda_post_commands():
    """

>     Yields our CondaPreCommand instance which attaches our ``custom_plugin_post_command_action`` to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Yields our CondaPostCommand instance which attaches our ``custom_plugin_post_command_action`` to
```

> @hookimpl
> def conda_post_command():
>     """
>     Returns our CondaPreCommand class which attaches our ``custom_plugin_post_command_action`` to
>     the "install" and "create" command.
>     """
>     yield CondaPostCommand(
>         name=f"{PLUGIN_NAME}_post_command",
>         action=custom_plugin_post_command_action,
>         run_for={"install", "create"}
>     )

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@hookimpl
def conda_post_commands():
    """
    Yields our CondaPreCommand instance which attaches our ``custom_plugin_post_command_action`` to
    the "install" and "create" command.
    """
    yield CondaPostCommand(
        name=f"{PLUGIN_NAME}_post_command",
        action=custom_plugin_post_command_action,
        run_for={"install", "create"}
    )
```

```

### `on_exception`

For the `on_exception` hook, plugin authors begin by defining a `conda.plugins.hookimpl` decorated 
function called `conda_on_exception`. This function will return the `CondaOnException` class with the
following attributes:

- `name`: unique name which identifies this plugin hook
- `action`: a callable which contains the code to be run

#### Example

```python

> from conda.plugins import hookimpl, CondaOnException
> 
> 
> PLUGIN_NAME = "custom_plugin"
> 
> 
> def custom_plugin_on_exception_action():
>     """
>     Defines our custom on_exception action which simply prints a message.
>     """
>     print("on_exception action")
> 
> 
> @hookimpl
> def conda_on_exception():
>     """
>     Returns our CondaOnException class which attaches our ``custom_plugin_on_exception_action``.
>     """
>     yield CondaOnException(
>         name=f"{PLUGIN_NAME}_on_exception",
>         action=custom_plugin_on_exception_action
>     )

Reviewer 2: It might make sense to make sure that the hook spec is set up as [`firstresult=True`](https://pluggy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/#first-result-only) to make sure we can define exception handlers that are final, and those that just inspect the exception and then move to the next registered exception handler.

Secondly, the hook implementation should receive the exception object as an argument and store it in the `CondaExceptionHandler` instance for later use. AND the actual handler callable should _also_ be passed the exception object so that it can do something with the exception.

Lastly, I think the naming is a little off about this, the hook yields handlers, so we should name the domain object `CondaExceptionHandler` and the hook spec `conda_exception_handlers`. 

```suggestion
from conda.plugins import hookimpl, CondaOnException

PLUGIN_NAME = "custom_plugin"

def print_exception(exception):
    """
    Defines our custom on_exception handler which prints a message
    with the provided exception object.
    """
    print(f"Caught exception: {exception}")

@hookimpl
def conda_exception_handlers(exception):
    """
    Returns our CondaExceptionHandler class which attaches our ``print_exception(``.
    """
    yield CondaExceptionHandler(
        name=f"{PLUGIN_NAME}_exception_handler",
        handler=print_exception,
        exception=exception,
    )
```

plugin hooks is best so that we do not overwhelm would-be conda plugin authors. Depending on how much
these plugin hooks are used and whether there is a demand, we may choose add more in the future with a 
new CEP. For now though, we believe it is best to stick with this narrow selection as we slowly grow
our plugin ecosystem.

## FAQ

- Will I have access to global variables such as `conda.base.context.context` in my plugin hook?
    - Yes, for all plugin hooks listed in this CEP, they will be placed after the global context
      object has been initialized.

- Where exactly will the `pre_command` hooks be called?
    - All registered `pre_command` hooks will be called before the `do_call` call in the
      [`conda.cli.main:main_subshell`][conda-pre-invoke-location] function.

- Where exactly will the `post_command` hooks be called?
    - All registered `post_command` hooks will be called after the `do_call` call in the
      [`conda.cli.main:main_subshell`][conda-pre-invoke-location] function.

- Where exactly will the `on_exception` hooks be called?
    - All registered `on_exception` hooks will be called inside the

>       [`conda.exceptions.ExceptionHandler`][conda-on-exception-location] class.

Reviewer 2: I think the `conda.exceptions.ExceptionHandler` should be instead the default exception handler registered ([using the `tryfirst=True` hookimpl parameter](https://pluggy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html?highlight=tryfirst#call-time-order))

existing [`conda.exceptions.ExceptionHandler`][conda-exception-handler] class. 
For each hook, we outline example use cases and
show exactly how plugin authors will define these new hooks.

## Specification

This specification calls for the creation of the following three new plugin hooks:

- `pre_command`: runs before the invoked conda command is run
- `post_command`: runs after the invoked conda command is run
- `exception_handler`: allows overriding or extending the existing
  [`conda.exceptions.ExceptionHandler`][conda-exception-handler]

Below, we discuss an example showing the use of the `pre_command` and `post_command` 
hooks together and an example of the `exception_handler` hook.

### `pre_command` and `post_command`

Plugin authors create the `pre_command` and `post_command` hooks by first defining a `conda.plugins.hookimpl`
decorated function called either `conda_pre_command` or `conda_post_command` which return either a `CondaPreCommand` 
or `CondaPostCommand` class, respectively. These classes will both receive the following three properties:

- `name`: unique name which identifies this plugin hook
- `action`: a callable which contains the code to be run

> - `run_for`: a Python `set` of strings representing the commands this will be run on (e.g. `install` and `create`)

Reviewer 3: is it optional or mandatory parameter? 
(also asked similar question if exception handler hook should have it as well)

Author: Good question. I think making this argument optional with the default behavior of it running for every command makes the most sense.

```python
from conda.plugins import hookimpl, CondaPreCommand, CondaPostCommand

PLUGIN_NAME = "custom_plugin"

def custom_plugin_pre_command_action(command):
    """
    Defines our custom pre-run action which simply prints a message.
    """
    print(f"pre-run action before {command}")

@hookimpl
def conda_pre_commands():
    """
    Yields our CondaPreCommand instance which attaches our ``custom_plugin_pre_command_action``
    to the "install" and "create" command.
    """
    yield CondaPreCommand(
        name=f"{PLUGIN_NAME}_pre_command",
        action=custom_plugin_pre_command_action,
        run_for={"install", "create"}
    )

def custom_plugin_post_command_action(command):
    """
    Defines our custom post-run action which simply prints a message.
    """
    print(f"post-run action after {command}")

@hookimpl
def conda_post_commands():
    """
    Yields our CondaPreCommand instance which attaches our ``custom_plugin_post_command_action`` to
    the "install" and "create" command.
    """
    yield CondaPostCommand(
        name=f"{PLUGIN_NAME}_post_command",
        action=custom_plugin_post_command_action,
        run_for={"install", "create"}
    )
```

> ### `exception_handler`

Reviewer 3: can we review, if current implementation of exception classes should be extended to support custom exception handlers? For example - let's say in the code we have (just found the first one)
```
    if args.all and prefix == context.default_prefix:
        msg = "cannot remove current environment. deactivate and run conda remove again"
        raise CondaEnvironmentError(msg)
```

If I want to write a custom exception handler for his exception, I'm missing context - which environment and reason, why it couldn't be removed (or is conda Context the right thing to use?)

If quick question - yes, it worth to review and extend exception handling mechanism - I believe it's another CEP?

Author: @aovasylenko, please see @jaimergp's comment below. I think he did a reasonable job of summarizing what you were talking about.

The scenario you are talking about would require a very extensive refactor to existing code, and I do not think it is realistic anytime soon. In the meantime, it's way better to just rely on the context object like you said.

For the `exception_handler` hook, plugin authors begin by defining a `conda.plugins.hookimpl` 
decorated  function called `conda_exception_handler`. This function will return the
 `CondaExceptionHandler` class with the following attributes:

- `name`: unique name which identifies this plugin hook
- `handler`: a class that is a subclass of [`conda.exceptions.ExceptionHandler`]

#### Example

```python
from conda.exceptions import ExceptionHandler
from conda.plugins import hookimpl, CondaExceptionHandler

PLUGIN_NAME = "custom_plugin"

class CustomExceptionHandler(ExceptionHandler):
    """Custom implementation of the ``conda.exceptions.ExceptionHandler``"""

    def handle_exception(self, exc_val, exc_tb):
        print(
            "Here's a custom message that will show when" 
            " an exception is encountered!"
        )

        super().handle_exception(exc_val, exc_tb)

@hookimpl
def conda_on_exception():
    """
    Returns our ``CondaExceptionHandler`` class which attaches our 
    registers our ``
    """
    yield CondaExceptionHandler(
        name=f"{PLUGIN_NAME}_exception_handler",

>         handler=CustomExceptionHandler

Reviewer 3: will it support `run_for` as well?

Author: I left that out because I didn't think that this plugin should have that fine grain control. It would also complicate the implementation too.
